New article "Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)" (#3282)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/index.md

Author: add a table effectively comparing/ contrasting/ summarizing the 4 profiling types

Author: added old Mem tool homepage text to Tools article

   limitations under the License.  -->
# Fix memory problems

To find memory issues that affect page performance, including memory leaks, memory bloat, and frequent garbage collections, use the following tools:
* Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager.
* The **Performance** tool's **Memory** checkbox.
* The **Memory** tool's various profiling types.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### Tools for investigating memory usage

Author: pls review & update the descriptions in the Task column; need summary recommendations of which tool to use when
@captainbrosset

| Use case | Tool | Article |
|---|---|---|

> | Monitor how much memory your webpage is using, in realtime.  A starting point for memory issue investigation. | Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager | [Monitor memory use in realtime (Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager)](./microsoft-edge-browser-task-manager.md) |
> | Visualize memory usage of a webpage over time.  A starting point to investigate webpage memory usage. | **Performance** tool > **Memory** checkbox | [Visualize memory leaks (Performance tool: Memory checkbox)](../evaluate-performance/reference.md#visualize-memory-leaks-performance-tool-memory-checkbox) in _Performance features reference_. |
> | Spot frequent garbage collections. | Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager, or **Performance** tool > **Memory** checkbox | [Spot frequent garbage collections (Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager, Performance tool's Memory checkbox)](#spot-frequent-garbage-collections-microsoft-edge-browser-task-manager-performance-tools-memory-checkbox), below. |
> | Record a heap snapshot, which shows memory distribution among your webpage's JavaScript objects and related DOM nodes. | **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** | [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)](./heap-snapshots.md) |
> | Find out when new memory is being allocated in your JavaScript heap (JS heap).  An allocation timeline shows instrumented JavaScript memory allocations over time.  Use this profile type to isolate memory leaks; select a time interval to see objects that were allocated within the interval and are still alive by the end of recording. | **Memory** tool > **Allocations on timeline** | [Use Allocation instrumentation on timeline ("Allocations on timeline" profiling type)](./allocation-profiler.md) |
> | Investigate memory allocation by function.  Record memory allocations using the sample method.  This profile type has minimal performance overhead and can be used for long-running operations; provides a good approximation of allocations, broken down by JavaScript execution stack. | **Memory** tool > **Allocation sampling** | [Speed up JavaScript runtime ("Allocation sampling" profiling type)](../rendering-tools/js-runtime.md) |
> | Find DOM tree memory leaks. | **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** | [Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Monitor how much memory a webpage uses in realtime. | Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager | [Monitor memory use in realtime (Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager)](./microsoft-edge-browser-task-manager.md) |
| Visualize the memory usage of a webpage over a period of time. | **Performance** tool > **Memory** checkbox | [Visualize memory leaks (Performance tool: Memory checkbox)](../evaluate-performance/reference.md#visualize-memory-leaks-performance-tool-memory-checkbox) in _Performance features reference_. |
| Spot frequent garbage collections. | Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager, or **Performance** tool > **Memory** checkbox | [Spot frequent garbage collections (Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager, Performance tool's Memory checkbox)](#spot-frequent-garbage-collections-microsoft-edge-browser-task-manager-performance-tools-memory-checkbox), below. |
| Inspect the contents of the memory used by a webpage. | **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** | [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)](./heap-snapshots.md) |
| Find out which JavaScript objects get created over a period of time, to isolate memory leaks. | **Memory** tool > **Allocations on timeline** | [Use Allocation instrumentation on timeline ("Allocations on timeline" profiling type)](./allocation-profiler.md) |
| Find out which JavaScript functions allocate memory over a period of time. This profile type has minimal performance overhead and can be used for long-running operations. | **Memory** tool > **Allocation sampling** | [Speed up JavaScript runtime ("Allocation sampling" profiling type)](../rendering-tools/js-runtime.md) |
| Find DOM tree memory leaks. | **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** | [Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |
```

* Microsoft Edge Browser Task Manager.  Frequently rising and falling **Memory** or **JavaScript Memory** values represent frequent garbage collection.

* The **Performance** tool's **Memory** checkbox.  In Performance memory recordings, frequent changes (rising and falling) to the JS heap or node count graphs indicate frequent garbage collection.

After you have identified the problem by using either of those tool, you can then use an **Allocations on timeline** recording to find out where memory is being allocated, and which functions are causing the allocations.

<!--[1]-->
<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Record a heap snapshot ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)

See:
* [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)](./heap-snapshots.md).
* [Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Heap snapshot" profiling type > Detached)](#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-heap-snapshot-profiling-type--detached), below.

<!--[2]-->
<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Identify JS heap memory leaks ("Allocations on timeline" profiling type)

Author: move content into article:
"Use Allocation instrumentation on timeline ("Allocations on timeline" profiling type)"
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/allocation-profiler?branch=pr-en-us-3282

present article is too long for LMC, and dup of section + article is confusing for maintainers & users

Author: status: 
Moved h2 section's content to the dedicated article, allocation-profiler.md:
**Use Allocation instrumentation on timeline ("Allocations on timeline" profiling type)**

that article has some explanation and then a UI steps section showing updated Mem tool home page - not sure if meets my design closely.  

Target design:
* Mem tool: Very short article, just tables of contrasting overviews: Use tool x to do ABC (link to article).
* Article about one of the profiling types: 1) Use this prof type to ABC.  2) UI steps.  3) verbose details.

Mem tool article status here: kept the h2 heading / section , now empty except for a link.  Linked to dedicated article (not to h2 section) in table at top.  I'll probably end up deleting this now-empty h2 section, but not quite yet bc need h2 section about each prof type, until Mem tool article is emptied out and changed to pure overview/contrast/nav.

@captainbrosset

![Object details](./index-images/allocation-timeline-snapshot-focused-constructor-expanded.png)

See also:
* [Use Allocation instrumentation on timeline ("Allocations on timeline" profiling type)](./allocation-profiler.md)

<!--[3]-->
<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Investigate memory allocation by function ("Allocation sampling" profiling type)

Author: move content into article:
"Speed up JavaScript runtime ("Allocation sampling" profiling type)"
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/rendering-tools/js-runtime?branch=pr-en-us-3282

present article is too long for LMC, and dup of section + article is confusing for maintainers & users

Author: status re: this section
Retained h2 heading for now, only containing a link to the dedicated article.
In table at top of this Mem tool article, linked to dedicated article, not to this empty h2 section.

Table at top of Mem tool article is too sparse though, needs to provide concise but effective explanation of when to use which tool or which prof type of Mem tool.  eg below) is the old text from Mem tool's home page, to give such contrast.  But need you to write fresh advice/ framing/ positioning, on when to use which tool/prof type, for which kind of task/analysis.

presently hidden comment at top of Mem tool article:

* **Heap snapshot** - Heap snapshot profiles show memory distribution among your page's JavaScript objects and related DOM nodes.

* **Allocation instrumentation on timeline** - Allocation timelines show instrumented JavaScript memory allocations over time.  Once profile is recorded you can select a time interval to see objects that were allocated within it and still alive by the end of recording.  Use this profile type to isolate memory leaks.

* **Allocation sampling** - Record memory allocations using sample method.  This profile type has minimal performance overhead and can be used for long running operations.  It provides good approximation of allocations broken down by JavaScript execution stack.

* **Detached elements** - _no such option button & text existed; assume the above intentions have been modified by adding this prof type and are now outdated advice/positioning_

@captainbrosset

Author: here are the overview explanations in latest Mem tool home page, how should Mem tool article summarize/contrast these prof types, along w/ Perf tool > Mem checkbox, and Edge Task Manager?

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ae2dc668-cea9-42fa-ad63-fb0049affb0a)

@captainbrosset

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Find DOM tree memory leaks from detached elements

A DOM node is only garbage-collected when there are no references to the node from either the DOM tree or JavaScript code running on the page.  A node is said to be "detached" when it is removed from the DOM tree but some JavaScript still references it.  Detached DOM nodes are a common cause of memory leaks.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Tools for investigating detached elements

| Tool | Pros | Cons | Docs |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** option button (profiling type) | Shows elements as DOM tree nodes. | Doesn't link to JavaScript source code. | [Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-detached-elements-profiling-type), below |

> | **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) | The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code.<!-- todo: how get to JS? --> | Shows elements as objects in memory. | [Debug DOM memory leaks by using the Detached Elements profiling type](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |

Author: is it true that the displayed detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code, when using **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > type **Detached** in the **Filter by class** text box?

rendered article section:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/?branch=pr-en-us-3282#tools-for-investigating-detached-elements

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1278be16-04d6-4677-8a5e-005d2fb55895)

Author: Outdated.  Closing.  Fresh [Comment](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/pull/3282/files#r1807863268)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Tools for investigating detached elements

| Tool | Pros | Cons | Docs |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** option button (profiling type) | Shows elements as DOM tree nodes. | Doesn't link to JavaScript source code. | [Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-detached-elements-profiling-type), below |
| **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) | The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code.<!-- todo: how get to JS? --> | Shows elements as objects in memory. | [Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Heap snapshot" profiling type > Detached)](#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-heap-snapshot-profiling-type--detached), below |
| **Detached Elements** tool | Shows elements as DOM tree nodes.  The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code. | Deprecated. | [Debug DOM memory leaks by using the Detached Elements tool](./dom-leaks.md) |

<!--[4]-->
<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)

Author: Create an article and move the content from this h2 section into that article.  Keep this h2 section, but in it, just link to the new article.

The present article is too long for LMC, which is designed for short articles.  When we move the explanatory technical content from the DE tool article into this h2 section, this section will be too long.  This section needs to just link out to a dedicated article, like the "Heap snapshot" option button / profiling type h2 section 
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/?branch=pr-en-us-3282#record-a-heap-snapshot-heap-snapshot-profiling-type
links out to the Record Heap Snapshots article:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots?branch=pr-en-us-3282

Either:
* Create that article in a future PR, when DE tool is removed and DE tool article is removed.
* In the present PR, build-out this article's existing design means creating a dedicated article for DE profiling type now, just like the dedicated article for Heap snapshot profiling type.

Author: created article, moved Mem tool > DE section content to there and linked to there, copied/trimmed explanatory content from DE tool article with Maint comments

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Find DOM tree memory leaks from detached elements

A DOM node is only garbage-collected when there are no references to the node from either the DOM tree or JavaScript code running on the page.  A node is said to be "detached" when it is removed from the DOM tree but some JavaScript still references it.  Detached DOM nodes are a common cause of memory leaks.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Tools for investigating detached elements

| Tool | Pros | Cons | Docs |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** option button (profiling type) | Shows elements as DOM tree nodes. | Doesn't link to JavaScript source code. | [Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-detached-elements-profiling-type), below |

> | **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) | The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code.<!-- todo: how get to JS? --> | Shows elements as objects in memory. | [Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Heap snapshot" profiling type > Detached)](#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-heap-snapshot-profiling-type--detached), below |

Author: is it true that the displayed detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code, when using *Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type)?
@captainbrosset

Author: Outdated, entered fresh [Comment](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/pull/3282/files#r1807848944), closing

   The detached elements are displayed, as DOM nodes like in the DOM tree in the **Elements** tool.  In the **Profiles** list, in the **Detached elements** section, the profile is listed.

1. Expand a DOM node to display its child elements (DOM nodes):

   ![An expanded detached DOM node](./index-images/detached-dom-node-expanded.png)

   These detached elements (DOM nodes) are memory leaks, if they aren't going to be reused by the application.

If you want to return to the list of option buttons for profiling types, in the upper left of the **Memory** tool, click **Profiles** (![the Profiles icon](./index-images/profiles-icon.png)).

For additional ways to assess memory leaks, see [Tools for investigating detached elements](#tools-for-investigating-detached-elements), above.
<!-- 
See also:
* [Detached Elements profiling type in Memory tool](../whats-new/2024/10/devtools-130.md#detached-elements-profiling-type-in-memory-tool) in _What's New in DevTools (Microsoft Edge 130)_.
-->

<!--[1]-->
<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Heap snapshot" profiling type > Detached)

Author: how to you get to the JavaScript source code from a detached node at the end of this section?

rendered article section:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/?branch=pr-en-us-3282#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-heap-snapshot-profiling-type--detached

@captainbrosset

Reviewer: Maybe replace these instructions below with instructions that use the Detached Elements demo instead. Using that demo, the steps are roughly:
1. Room 1, Fast traffic button, Stop button. Then Room 2.
2. GC (trashcan icon).
3. Record heap snapshot.
4. Click **Filter by class** and type **Detached**.
5. Expand **Detached <div>** object in the heap snapshot.
6. Select one of the **<div class="message">** in the list.
    Link to soure code is displayed in the **Retainers** panel, at the bottom.

Author: docs design: at this point, it's unclear whether this h2 section (Heap snap > Detach) will remain in Mem tool article; almost certainly not.  Predict this section's content will be moved either to:
* Heap shap prof type article <-- probably here, b/c articles are per prof type - despite section being a crossover of heap snap & detached, it's literally using the HS prof type therefore section should move to there, not to DE prof type article.
* Detached elements prof type article

and will eventually remove this h2 heading from Mem tool article, and will link from Mem tool tools-overview table to h2 in one of the above dedicated articles, probably HS prof type article.
@captainbrosset

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Find DOM tree memory leaks from detached elements

A DOM node is only garbage-collected when there are no references to the node from either the DOM tree or JavaScript code running on the page.  A node is said to be "detached" when it is removed from the DOM tree but some JavaScript still references it.  Detached DOM nodes are a common cause of memory leaks.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Tools for investigating detached elements

| Tool | Pros | Cons | Docs |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** option button (profiling type) | Shows elements as DOM tree nodes. | Doesn't link to JavaScript source code. | [Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |

> | **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > **Detached** | The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code.<!-- todo: how get to JS? --> | Shows elements as objects in memory. | [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)](./heap-snapshots.md) |

Author: is it true that the displayed detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code, when using **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > type **Detached** in the **Filter by class** text box?

rendered article section:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/?branch=pr-en-us-3282#tools-for-investigating-detached-elements

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1278be16-04d6-4677-8a5e-005d2fb55895)

> | **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > **Detached** | The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code.<!-- todo: how get to JS? --> | Shows elements as objects in memory. | [Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |

Author: is it true that the displayed detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code, when using **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > type **Detached** in the **Filter by class** text box?

rendered article section:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/?branch=pr-en-us-3282#tools-for-investigating-detached-elements

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1278be16-04d6-4677-8a5e-005d2fb55895)

If you are investigating objects that were only GC'd during specific major or minor GC operations, configure the settings appropriately to track the operation you care about. To learn more about the differences between major and minor GC, see [Trash talk: the Orinoco garbage collector | V8 JavaScript engine developer blog](https://v8.dev/blog/trash-talk).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Find DOM tree memory leaks from detached elements

A DOM node is only garbage-collected when there are no references to the node from either the DOM tree or JavaScript code running on the page.  A node is said to be "detached" when it is removed from the DOM tree but some JavaScript still references it.  Detached DOM nodes are a common cause of memory leaks.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Tools for investigating detached elements

> | Tool | Pros | Cons | Docs |
> |---|---|---|---|
> | **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** option button (profiling type) | Shows elements as DOM tree nodes. | Doesn't link to JavaScript source code. | [Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |
> | **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > **Detached** | The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code.<!-- todo: how get to JS? --> | Shows elements as objects in memory. | [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)](./heap-snapshots.md) |
> | **Detached Elements** tool | Shows elements as DOM tree nodes.  The detached element has a link to its JavaScript source code. | Deprecated. | [Debug DOM memory leaks by using the Detached Elements tool](./dom-leaks.md) |

Reviewer: Instead of Pros and Cons, I would phrase this as use cases.

```suggestion
| Tool | Use case | Docs |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** option button (profiling type) | Shows detached elements only, as DOM tree nodes.  | [Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |
| **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > **Detached** | Shows all objects in memory, including detached elements, which requires filtering, with links to the JavaScript source code in the **Retainers** panel. | [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)](./heap-snapshots.md) |
| **Detached Elements** tool | Shows detached elements only, as DOM tree nodes, with links to the JavaScript source code. | Deprecated. | [Debug DOM memory leaks by using the Detached Elements tool](./dom-leaks.md) |
```

Author: result:
```
| Tool | Use case | Docs |
|---|---|---|
| **Memory** tool > **Detached elements** option button (profiling type) | Shows detached elements only, as DOM tree nodes.  | [Debug DOM memory leaks ("Detached elements" profiling type)](./dom-leaks-memory-tool-detached-elements.md) |
| **Memory** tool > **Heap snapshot** option button (profiling type) > **Detached** | Shows all objects in memory, including detached elements, which requires filtering, with links to the JavaScript source code in the **Retainers** panel. | [Find DOM tree memory leaks ("Heap snapshot" profiling type > Detached)](./heap-snapshots.md#find-dom-tree-memory-leaks-heap-snapshot-profiling-type--detached) in _Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool ("Heap snapshot" profiling type)_. |
| **Detached Elements** tool | Shows detached elements only, as DOM tree nodes, with links to the JavaScript source code. | [Debug DOM memory leaks by using the Detached Elements tool](./dom-leaks.md) |
```
rendered preview:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c2d76bb9-12c5-4c0b-aaf9-cb507612dec8)
